---
layout: post
title: stickers!
category: available
image:
    name: trans-rights-stickers.jpg
    alt: "Clear and holographic stickers in the same design - a smiling skull with speech bubble reading 'trans rights!'"
tags:
    - sticker
---

Clear and holographic stickers ordered through [DieCutStickers](diecutstickers.com). See the [stickers tag](tag/sticker) to view available designs.




## previous round of stickers from StickerYou

details below provided from StickerYou FAQs.

### clear stickers deets

**Q:** What do you mean by "removable adhesive"? Are my stickers going to fall off?

**A:** Removable adhesive means our stickers are able to peeled off and re-stuck immediately if you need to reposition your sticker. This isn't going to weaken the adhesion, as we guarantee our stickers stick strong, last long, and won't rip or tear when exposed to the elements. This also means our high quality stickers peel-off residue free, and won't damage your stuff if you do decide to remove them. 

**Q:** I want to put the stickers on my laptop, but worry about damaging it. Will it leave residue behind?

**A:** Our clear stickers will stick strong for as long as you need them, but when you’re ready to remove, the stickers will come off clean, without leaving any messy residue behind!

**Q:** Can I stick these stickers outside, will they last?

**A:** Yes they will! Our stickers are water-resistant, and if applied correctly our stickers will stick strong and last long outside for at least a few years.

### holographic stickers deets

**Q:** These custom stickers are permanent, will they damage a surface if I try to remove them?

**A:** Depending on the surface or material they are applied to, it’s possible that the surface may be damaged. Most surfaces that have been painted may be damaged when trying to remove a permanent die-cut sticker. For example, surfaces such as laminates and painted walls. It may be possible to remove permanent holographic stickers from lacquered / bake-dried surfaces such as car paint, however we do not guarantee that the surface will not be damaged.

**Q:** Are these holographic die-cut stickers water, dishwasher and freezer safe?

**A:** These stickers are certainly freezer safe and water repellant. They will also withstand dishwasher use thanks to their permanent adhesive. They are not recommended for use on fabrics and other similar materials and as such should not be put through a washer/dryer.
